# Getting and Cleaning Data Peer Assignment

This project serves as a way to demonstrate the ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set.  This project uses data collected in a wearable computing study using the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. 

## Installing / Getting started

The run_analysis.R script can be run as a stand alone R script or in R-studio.  The source assumes that the user already has the input data from the below zip file installed on their local machine:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

## Developing


## Building
If you would like to run the source code on your local machine, the following mods may needs to be made:
-  the source code currently has a commented out statement which uses a working directory of '~Rworkspace/Course_3/Peer assignment/GettingCleanData'.  If using a different working directory, this statement can be modified and uncommented.
-  the folder structure within the '~/Peer assignment/GettingCleanData' contains the 'UCI HAR Dataset' folder as it is in the zip file.  Again, if not keeping the UCI HAR Dataset folder within your working directory, the statements that read from the train and test folders can be modified.  For example, this statement would need to be modified:
training_set = read.table('./UCI HAR Dataset/train/X_train.txt')


## Deploying / Publishing


## Features
The project has 5 main steps that it attempts to accomplish using the run_analysis.R script in order to produce a tidy data set:
### 1)  Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.  This is broken into the following 4 steps:
#### Load and merge the training and test sets of measurements by combining the rows in the datasets.  They already share the same column names.
#### Load and merge the training and test sets of labels by combining the rows in the datasets.  They already share the same column names.
#### Load and merge the training and test sets of subjects by combining the rows in the datasets.  They already share the same column names.
#### Merge the measurements, labels and subjects into one data set by combining the columns in the datasheets.

### 2)  Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
This is accomplished by first loading the features.txt which contains the description for each of the mesurements.  Any measurements which include the terms 'mean' or 'std' are included.  The directions are not specific about whether meanFreq() measurements should be included.  Thus, they are not excluded.
The merged data set is then filtered to only inlcude columns which contain 'mean' or 'std' measurements.  Also, the activity and subject ID columns are retained.

### 3)  Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
This is accomplished by first loading the activity names from activity_labels.txt.  The activity idendtifers in the merged set of measurements/labels/subjects are then replaced with the descriptions from activity_labels.txt.

### 4)  Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
This is accomplised by using the measurement descriptions which were found in features.txt.  The columns are named with these descriptions.

### 5)  From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.
This is accomplished in 2 steps, both using library Resahpe2:  
#### the data is melted into a narrow data set
#### the data is then cast (using function dcast) into a wide, tidy data set.  The definitions for the data in this data set can be found in codebook.md.
The data is tidy for the following reasons.
-  headings make it clear which column is which (with further explanations in codebook.md)
-  one column per variable
-  one observation per row

If the user would like to read the tidy data set generated by this program, it can be read using the command:
read.table(file='TidyData.txt', header=TRUE)

## Contributing


## Licensing

